Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

REVIEW

Open Access

Engineering Escherichia coli to overproduce
aromatic amino acids and derived compounds
Alberto Rodriguez, Juan A Martínez, Noemí Flores, Adelfo Escalante, Guillermo Gosset and Francisco Bolivar*

Abstract
The production of aromatic amino acids using fermentation processes with recombinant microorganisms can be an
advantageous approach to reach their global demands. In addition, a large array of compounds with alimentary
and pharmaceutical applications can potentially be synthesized from intermediates of this metabolic pathway.
However, contrary to other amino acids and primary metabolites, the artificial channelling of building blocks from
central metabolism towards the aromatic amino acid pathway is complicated to achieve in an efficient manner. The
length and complex regulation of this pathway have progressively called for the employment of more integral
approaches, promoting the merge of complementary tools and techniques in order to surpass metabolic and
regulatory bottlenecks. As a result, relevant insights on the subject have been obtained during the last years,
especially with genetically modified strains of Escherichia coli. By combining metabolic engineering strategies with
developments in synthetic biology, systems biology and bioprocess engineering, notable advances were achieved
regarding the generation, characterization and optimization of E. coli strains for the overproduction of aromatic
amino acids, some of their precursors and related compounds. In this paper we review and compare recent
successful reports dealing with the modification of metabolic traits to attain these objectives.
Keywords: Aromatic compounds, Escherichia coli, Metabolic engineering, Systems biotechnology, Synthetic biology,
Shikimate pathway, Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Tryptophan

Introduction
The aromatic amino acids (AAA), L-tryptophan (L-TRP),
L-phenylalanine (L-PHE) and L-tyrosine (L-TYR), are the
final products of the aromatic biosynthetic pathway comprising the shikimate (SHK) pathway, which connects central carbon metabolism (CCM) with the biosynthesis of
chorismate (CHA), the last common precursor in the
terminal branches for AAA biosynthesis (Figure 1)
[1,2]. These pathways are present in bacteria and in
several eukaryotic organisms such as ascomycetes
fungi, apicomplexans, and plants [3,4]. The AAA are
essential components in the diet of higher animals and
humans, hence they are used as dietary supplements
(e.g. diet of swine and poultry consisting of grains of corn
and soybean is low in L-TRP) and key precursors of industrial and pharmaceutical compounds (e.g. L-PHE is the key
ingredient in the synthesis of the artificial sweetener
* Correspondence: bolivar@ibt.unam.mx
Departamento de Ingeniería Celular y Biocatálisis, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Avenida Universidad
2001, Col. Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, México

aspartame, whereas L-TYR is an essential dietary component for phenylketonuria patients as the starter material
for L-DOPA or melanin production) [5]. The annual
worldwide production of amino acids is estimated to be
above 4.5 million tons/year, with a market growth for
most amino acids of ~10% and higher [6,7]. Among the
aromatic amino acids, L-TRP has a market size of more
than 14,000 tons/year [8] and the production of L-PHE
exceeds 30,000 tons/year [9].
It is well established that the production of high-valued
commodities can be performed cost-efficiently by the rational design, modification and cultivation of a recombinant
microorganism. In particular, the development of efficient
microbial processes for accumulation of compounds derived from the AAA biosynthetic pathway has not been an
easy task for metabolic and bioprocess engineers. For more
than 20 years, considerable efforts have been directed towards characterizing and purposely overriding the naturally
tight metabolic regulation of this pathway. These continued
efforts have relied on knowledge obtained from pioneer
works on the biosynthesis of aromatic compounds by the

© 2014 Rodriguez et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

Page 2 of 15

Glucose

Periplasmic
space

PTS

Cytoplasmatic
membrane
PYR
Cytoplasm

Glucose-6-P

6PGNL

GLYCOLYSIS

zwf

PPP
tktA

E4P
PEP

DAHP
aroF

pykA
pykF

pckA
ppc

ppsA

SHIKIMATE PATHWAY
DHQ

DHS
aroD

aroB

SHK
aroE
ydiB

aroG

S3P
aroK
aroL

OAA

aroC

aroH
tyrA

CHA

pheA

PYR
lpdA
aceE
aceF

EPSP
aroA

trpED

ilvE,
aspC

L-PHE

pheA

PPN

PRE

ANT

tyrB

trpD
tyrA

TCA

ACoA

CIT

PRANT

gltA

trpC

HPP
aspC,

CDP

tyrB

trpC

IGP

L-TYR

trpA

L-Ser
TERMINAL PATHWAYS FOR
AAA BIOSYNTHESIS

Indole
trpB

L-TRP

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the AAA pathway in Escherichia coli including its transcriptional and allosteric regulatory control
circuits. Central carbon metabolism intermediates and genes shown: PPP (pentose phosphate pathway); TCA (tricarboxylic acid cycle); E4P
(erythrose-4-P); PGNL (6-phospho D-glucono-1,5-lactone); PEP (phosphoenolpyruvate); PYR (pyruvate); ACoA (acetyl-CoA); CIT (citrate); OAA
(oxaloacetate); zwf (glucose 6-phosphate-1-dehydrogenase); tktA (transketolase I); pykA, pykF (pyruvate kinase II and pyruvate kinase I, respectively);
lpdA, aceE, and aceF (coding for PYR dehydrogenase subunits); gltA (citrate synthase); pckA (PEP carboxykinase); ppc (PEP carboxylase); ppsA
(PEP synthetase). Shikimate pathway intermediates and genes shown: DAHP (3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate); DHQ
(3-dehydroquinate); DHS (3-dehydroshikimate); SHK (shikimate); S3P (SHK-3-phosphate); EPSP (5-enolpyruvyl-shikimate 3-phosphate); CHA (chorismate);
aroF, aroG, aroH (DAHP synthase AroF, AroG and AroH, respectively); aroB (DHQ synthase); aroD (DHQ dehydratase); aroE, ydiB (SHK dehydrogenase
and SHK dehydrogenase / quinate dehydrogenase, respectively); aroA (3-phosphoshikimate-1-carboxyvinyltransferase); aroC (CHA synthase).
Terminal AAA biosynthetic pathways intermediates and genes shown: ANT (anthranilate); PRANT (N-(5-phosphoribosyl)-anthranilate); CDP
(1-(o-carboxyphenylamino)-1'-deoxyribulose 5'-phosphate); IGP ((1S,2R)-1-C-(indol-3-yl)glycerol 3-phosphate); trpE, trpD (ANT synthase component I and
II, respectively); trpC (indole-3-glycerol phosphate synthase / phosphoribosylanthranilate isomerase); trpA (indoleglycerol phosphate aldolase); trpB
(tryptophan synthase); PRE (prephenate); PPN (phenylpyruvate); HPP (4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate); tyrA, pheA (TyrA and PheA subunits of the CHA
mutase, respectively); ilvE (subunit of the branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase); aspC (subunit of aspartate aminotransferase); tyrB
(tyrosine aminotransferase). Continuous arrows show single enzymatic reactions, black dashed arrows show several enzymatic reactions, long-dashed
blue arrows indicate allosteric regulation and dotted blue arrows indicate transcriptional repression. Adapted from EcoCyc database [1].

groups of B.D. Davis, F. Gibson, C. Yanofsky, A.J. Pittard,
K.M. Herrmann and J.W. Frost, among others, whose
contributions have been comprehensively reviewed in
the past [2,10-12].
Recently, the availability of omics-scale data has allowed
significant advances in metabolic reconstruction and modeling, resulting in better strain development [13]. Likewise,
the increased use of combinatorial and evolutionary
approaches, fueled by a rapid expansion of synthetic

molecular tools, opened the possibility for testing novel and
large combinations of gene expression systems and genetic
backgrounds [14,15]. Additionally, efforts concerning the
optimization of fermentation conditions have succeeded
in scaling-up many AAA production processes, while simultaneously providing important feedback on the physiological behavior of engineered strains [16,17]. However,
the availability of operational tools and techniques, as well
as the amount of physiological and molecular information,

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

are unevenly distributed among the microorganisms
currently used for the production of AAA. These circumstances have contributed to positioning E. coli as
the organism with most reported success cases and has
resulted in a wide array of well-characterized production
strains [18,19].
In this paper we review some notable advances in the
generation, characterization and optimization of E. coli
strains for the overproduction of AAA, some of their
important precursors and related compounds. Although
these studies were classified in accordance to the main
schemes employed for each case, the constant expansion
and complementarity of such approaches has encouraged
scientists to apply a systems-based perspective [20,21].
Therefore, recent and representative works on the subject
using different strategies were selected and discussed.
Engineering of the CCM: glucose transport, glycolytic,
gluconeogenic, and pentose phosphate pathways

Successful metabolic engineering efforts for the generation
of E. coli strains that can overproduce AAA include:
(i) increasing the availability of the direct precursors
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and erythrose-4-phosphate
(E4P); (ii) enhancement of the first enzymatic reaction in the
SHK pathway to yield 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7phosphate (DAHP); (iii) improving the carbon flow through
the biosynthetic pathway of interest by removal of transcriptional and allosteric regulation; (iv) identifying and relieving
rate-limiting enzymatic reactions; (v) preventing loss of carbon flow towards competing pathways; (vi) enhancement of
product export; and (vii) prevention of product degradation
or re-internalization.
Regarding PEP metabolism, E. coli uses the phosphotransferase system (PTS) as the main system for the
translocation and phosphorylation of glucose from the
periplasmic space to the cytoplasmic environment,
consuming one PEP molecule which is converted to
pyruvate (PYR) [22,23]. This reaction yields one molecule
of glucose-6-phosphate which is catabolized by the glycolytic pathway, resulting in two PEP molecules (Figure 1).
PEP is a precursor feeding several biosynthetic pathways
and also participates in ATP generation, either by
substrate-level phosphorylation of ADP or indirectly as
an acetyl coenzyme-A (ACoA) precursor. When E. coli
grows in mineral broth containing glucose as the sole
carbon source the PTS consumes 50% of the available PEP,
whereas the reactions catalyzed by other enzymes such as
PEP carboxylase, PYR kinases, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine
enolpyruvyl transferase, and DAHP synthases (DAHPS),
consume approximately 16%, 15%, 16%, and 3% of
remaining PEP, respectively [23,24]. Therefore, PEP
can be converted to PYR by PTS and PYR kinases I
and II (coded by pykF and pykA respectively), and PYR
is converted to ACoA by the PYR dehydrogenase

Page 3 of 15

multienzyme complex (coded by aceE, aceF and lpd),
a reaction connecting the glycolytic pathway with the
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) [1]. Moreover, PEP and PYR
are key intermediates of the CCM as they are substrate of
at least six enzymes which determine the metabolic fate of
these intermediates (biosynthetic/catabolic pathways and
glycolytic/gluconeogenic capabilities of the cell): DAHPS
isoenzymes (AroF, AroG, and AroH coded by aroF, aroG
and aroH, respectively) [3,11]; PYR kinases I and II; PEP
synthetase (PpsA coded by ppsA); PEP carboxylase
(Ppc, coded by ppc); and PEP carboxykinase (PckA coded
by pckA) [25] (Figure 1).
Detailed knowledge of these nodes permitted the development of strategies that allowed higher PEP availability
for the biosynthesis of aromatic compounds, including the
replacement of glucose transport and phosphorylation
capabilities of the PTS by alternative enzymes such as
the glucose facilitator and glucokinase from Zymomonas
mobilis (coded by glf and glk, respectively) [26-28], the
galactose permease and glucokinase from E. coli
(coded by galP and glk, respectively) [29,30], or the use of
an adaptive evolution process to select PTS− derivatives
growing at high specific growth rates (μ) on glucose
[31,32]. Additionally, high PEP availability has been
achieved by modulation of the carbon flux from PEP to
the TCA caused by the inactivation of one or both of the
PYR kinases [33,34], as well as improving the recycling of
PYR to PEP by a plasmid-encoded copy of PEP synthetase
[35-37]. The overexpression of pckA, in combination with
an enhanced carbon flow through the glyoxylate shunt,
has also been proposed as a strategy to increase the yield
of aromatic compounds [38,39]. An alternative approach
to increase PEP is the attenuation of CsrA, a regulatory
protein of carbohydrate metabolism, either by direct gene
knockout or by increasing the expression of its negative
regulatory RNA, coded by csrB [40,41].
On the other hand, E4P is a metabolite that participates in reversible reactions present in the non-oxidative
branch of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), as well
as a substrate in irreversible reactions that lead to the
production of aromatic amino acids or vitamin B6 [42].
E4P can also be directly produced from sedoheptulose1,7-bisphosphate in a reaction that is probably favored
when the intracellular levels of sedoheptulose-7-phosphate
are high [43]. Metabolic engineering reports have shown
that a considerable increase in availability of E4P
(inferred by the increased production of aromatic compounds and pathway intermediates, such as DAHP) can
be achieved by overexpression of genes coding for a transketolase (tktA) [35,44-46] or a transaldolase (talB) [26,47].
Additional attempts to increase the carbon flow towards
the PPP for enhanced production of aromatic compounds
include the use of mutants lacking the enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase [48,49], the overexpression of enzyme

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [41,50], or the use
of multiple carbon sources, mainly hexoses, pentoses
and glycerol [51-54]. After an adequate supply of precursors has been established, it is essential to commit
this carbon towards the SHK pathway and to remove
control points and limiting steps to increase the production of target compounds.
Deregulation of the AAA pathway: identifying and
relieving rate-limiting steps

In E. coli, the DAHPS isoenzymes AroG, AroF and AroH
contribute to the total DAHPS activity and are subjected
to allosteric control by L-PHE, L-TYR and L-TRP, respectively (Figure 1). AroG contributes about 80% of the overall
DAHPS activity, AroF about 15%, and the remaining
activity corresponds to AroH DAHPS [3,11]. Both the
AroG and AroF isoenzymes are completely inhibited
by about 0.1 mM of the corresponding amino acids,
but AroH is only partially inhibited by L-TRP. Apparent
inability of L-TRP to totally inhibit this isoenzyme is proposed to be a mechanism to ensure a sufficient supply of
CHA for the biosynthesis of other aromatic compounds
when AAA are present in excess in the growth medium
[3]. Specific amino acid residues involved in the allosteric
sites have been identified by structural analysis of feedbackinsensitive mutant enzymes, resulting in the targeted
generation of the feedback resistant (fbr) variants AroGfbr
and AroFfbr [28,31,55]. Additionally to allosteric control of
DAHPS isoenzymes, their transcriptional expression can
be controlled by the tyr- and trp- repressors complexed
with the AAA [3,11].
Consequently, amplification and deregulation of DAHPS
activity is an essential strategy to overproduce aromatic
compounds and its precursor SHK. Introduction of
plasmid-encoded copies of aroFfbr and aroGfbr combined with additional plasmid-cloned gene tktA, or
their chromosomal integrations in gene clusters, have
resulted in increased carbon flow from the CCM to the
SHK pathway for the production of L-PHE [11,55,56],
L-TYR [5,57,58] and L-TRP [59-61]. Positive results were
also obtained with the insertion of an aroGfbr gene into
the chromosome of an L-PHE producing strain while
being controlled by a promoter that is active during
late cultivation stages, in order to counteract the fall of
DAHPS activity in stationary phase [62].
Further increases in carbon flux through the SHK pathway have been attained by the removal of transcriptional
and allosteric control points and by relieving limiting enzymatic reactions [2,11,19,23]. The reactions catalyzed by
DHQ synthase (encoded by aroB) and SHK kinase isoenzymes I and II (encoded by aroK and aroL, respectively) are
considered as rate-limiting [63-65]. In addition, the
reaction catalyzed by the enzyme quinate/shikimate
dehydrogenase (coded by ydiB) was also reported as

Page 4 of 15

limiting in the development of L-TYR production strains
[58]. Either the overexpression of some of these genes by
plasmid-cloned copies [28,66], their co-expression in a
modular operon under control of diverse promoters
[50,58,67], or their expression by chromosomal integration
of additional gene copies and promoter engineering by
chromosomal evolution [68], have relieved to a great extent these rate-limiting steps typically encountered during
the development of SHK and AAA overproducing strains
(Table 1). To date, genetically modified E. coli strains can
overproduce SHK from glucose with yields in the range of
0.08 to 0.42 mol SHK / mol glucose under diverse culture
conditions [28,50,68-70]. SHK is a key intermediate of the
common biosynthetic aromatic pathway (Figure 1) gaining
relevance as the substrate for the chemical synthesis of
the drug oseltamivir phosphate, known commercially
as Tamiflu®, an efficient inhibitor of the surface protein
neuraminidase of seasonal influenza, avian influenza
H5N1, and human influenza H1N1 viruses [71-74].
In addition to modifications in the SHK pathway,
metabolic engineering approaches to overproduce L-TYR
typically include alterations in TyrR and/or trp regulons.
The TyrR regulon comprises diverse essential genes implicated in AAA biosynthesis and transport [1,75]. TyrR acts
as a dual transcriptional activator and repressor; however,
the repression mechanism requires the ATP-dependent
binding of AAA to the central protein domain. L-TYR is
the major effector of TyrR-mediated repression, although
some repression occurs with L-PHE as co-repressor for
aroF, aroL, tyrP (coding for a L-TYR specific permease),
aroP (coding for an aromatic amino acid permease) and
aroG genes, whereas activation does not apparently involve an ATP-dependent binding of aromatic amino acids
[1,2,5,11]. Inactivation of TyrR-mediated regulation by
deletion of tyrR and overexpression of aroGfbr and tyrAfbr,
combined with the overexpression of CCM genes (e.g.
ppsA and tktA) and genes of the L-TYR biosynthetic
pathway (e.g. tyrB, aroC, aroA) have improved the production of L-TYR in diverse E. coli strains [5,11,58].
Similar results were obtained for L-PHE in resting cells
by overexpression of a feedback-resistant or an evolved (ev)
CHA mutase/prephenate dehydratase enzymes (coded by
pheAfbr and pheAev, respectively) [55,76]. The bifunctional
enzyme chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydrogenase
TyrA, catalyzes the shared first step in L-PHE and L-TYR
final biosynthetic pathways (the conversion of CHA to prephenate), as well as the second step in L-TYR biosynthesis
(the subsequent NAD+-dependent oxidative decarboxylation
of prephenate to 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate) (Figure 1).
TyrA catalyzes both reactions in separate domains of the
protein and the CHA mutase/prephenate dehydrogenase
is feedback-inhibited by L-TYR (up to 95% inhibition
of the prephenate dehydrogenase and 45% of the CHA
mutase activity) [1,2]. The bifunctional enzyme CHA

Strain

Relevant characteristics

Main compound produced (titera, and/or yieldb, d).
Relevant culture conditions

References

SP1.1pts/pSC6.090B (RB791 derivative)

ΔptsHIcrr ΔaroK ΔaroL serA::aroB / (plasmid) aroFfbr tktA, Ptac aroE serA, Ptac glfc glkc

SHK (84, 0.33b). 10 L fed-batch reactors with glucose,
AAA and 15 g/L of yeast extract

[28]

AR36 (JM101 derivative)

ΔptsHIcrr ΔaroK ΔaroL ΔlacI ΔpykF / (plasmid) Ptrc aroB tktA aroGfbr aroE aroD zwf

SHK (43, 0.42b). 1 L batch reactors with 100 g/L of
glucose and 30 g/L of yeast extract

[50]

SA116 (BW25113 derivative)

ΔaroK ΔaroL Ppps::PlacQ1, PcsrB::PlacQ1 / (chromosome) aroGfbr tktA aroB aroE, PT5
ppsA csrB, 5Ptac tktA nadK

SHK (3, 0.33b). Medium supplemented with 10 g/L
of glucose, 1 g/L of peptone and 1 g/L of proline

[68]

W14/pR15BABKG (W3110 derivative)

Δcrr ΔtyrA / (plasmid) PR aroG15 tyrB, PL pheAfbr ydiB aroK yddG

L-PHE (47, 0.25d). 15 L fed-batch reactors with
glucose and 1 g/L of tyrosine

[132]

FUS4.11/pF81kan (W3110 derivative)

ΔpheA ΔtyrA ΔaroF ΔlacIZYA ΔpykA ΔpykF / (chromosome) Ptac aroF aroB aroL,
(plasmid) Ptac pheAfbr aroF aroB aroL

L-PHE (13, 0.15d). 15 L multi-phase fed-batch reactors
with glycerol and lactic acid

[131]

BL21 (DE3)

(plasmid) containing the phenylalanine dehydrogenase gene of Acinetobacter lwoffii

L-PHE (5, 0.58d) 2 L batch reactors with 10 g/L of glycerol

[130]

op

fbr

d

L-TYR (2, 0.44 ). Shake flask cultures with 5 g/L of glucose

[58]

ΔpheA ΔtyrR / (chromosome) PL tyrAfbr aroGfbr, point mutations in hisH and purF,
(plasmid) rpoA

L-TYR (14, 0.12d) 2 L fed-batch reactors with glucose

[101]

MG1655 derivative

ΔpheA ΔpheL / (chromosome) Ptrc tyrA

L-TYR (55, 0.30d). 200 L fed-batch reactors with glucose

[17]

FB-04/pSV03 (W3110 derivative)

ΔtrpR ΔtnaA ΔpheA ΔtyrA / (plasmid) aroF

GPT1017 (W3110 derivative)

MG1655 derivative

(plasmid) Plac-UV5 aroE aroD aroB , PL-tetO1 aroG
tyrB tyrAfbr aroC, Ptrc aroA aroL

rpoA14R (K-12 derivative)

fbr

ppsA tktA, (plasmid) Plac-UV5

fbr

trpE D

d

[59]

ΔtrpR ΔtnaA ΔptsG ΔaroP ΔtnaB Δmtr / (chromosome) swapping of tryptophan
attenuator and trp promoter by 5CPtacs, (plasmid) aroGfbr trpEfbr tktA

L-TRP (16). 5 L fed-batch reactors with glucose and
1 g/L of yeast extract

[80]

TRTH0709/pMEL03 (MG1655 derivative)

ΔtrpR ΔtnaA Δpta Δmtr / (plasmid) aroGfbr trpEfbrDCBA serA, (plasmid) tktA ppsA yddG

L-TRP (49). 30 L fed-batch reactors with glucose and
1 g/L of yeast extract

[61]

Vio-4 (MG1655 derivative)

ΔtrpR ΔtnaA ΔsdaA Δlac ΔtrpL Δgal Δxyl Δfuc / (chromosome) Ptac aroF aroB aroL
tktA serAfbr vioDf, trpEfbr, (plasmid) vioABCEg

Violacein (0.7). 0.7 L fed-batch reactors with arabinose,
12 g/L of tryptone and 24 g/L of yeast extract

[82]

BKD5 (BW25113 derivative)

ΔptsG ΔtyrR ΔpykA ΔpykF ΔpheA / (plasmid) PlacUV5 aroGfbr tyrAfbr aroE, Ptrc
ppsA tktA glk, (plasmid) PlacUV5 T7 RNA polymerase, (plasmid) hpaBC d-ldhh

Salvianic acid A (7, 0.47b). 0.5 L fed-batch flasks with
glucose and 1 g/L of yeast extract

[94]

QH23 (ATCC 31884 derivative)

ΔpheLA ΔtyrA / (plasmid) PL lacO1 tyrAfbr ppsA tktA aroGfbr, (plasmid) PL lacO1 tali, op hpaBC

Caffeic acid (0.8). Shake flask cultures with 2.5 g/L of
glucose, 10 g/L of glycerol and phenylalanine

[105]

pAD-AG/ΔtyrR (BL21 (DE3) derivative)

ΔtyrR / (plasmid) aroGfbr tyrAfbr, (plasmid) talj

4-coumaric acid (1). Shake flask cultures with 15 g/L
of glucose

[103]

VH33 ΔtyrR_DOPA (W3110 derivative)

ΔptsHIcrr / (chromosome) Ptrc galP, (plasmid) tktA PlacUV5 aroGfbr, (plasmid) Ptrc
tyrCc pheA

L-DOPA (1.5, 0.05d). 1 L batch reactors with LB and
50 g/L glucose

[84]

W3110 trpD9923/pS0 + pY + pAvnD

(plasmid) PL-tetO1 ydiB aroD aroB aroGfbr ppsA tktA, (plasmid) PlacUV5 tyrB tyrAfbr aroC
aroA aroL, (plasmid) PlacUV5 HCBTk 4CL1l tali

Avenanthramide D (27e). Shake flask cultures with
10 g/L of glucose

[87]

a
g/L; bmol substrate/mol product; cgene from Z. mobilis; dg substrate/g product; eμM; fgene from J. lividum; ggenes from C. violaceum; hgene from L. pentosus; igene from R. glutinis; jgene from S. espanaensis; kgene
from D. caryophyllus; lgene from N. tabacum; opcodon-optimized variant.

Page 5 of 15

L-TRP (13, 0.10 ). 3 L fed-batch reactors with glucose,
2 g/L of L-PHE and 3 g/L of L-TYR

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

Table 1 Relevant E. coli strains engineered for the overproduction of compounds derived from the aromatic biosynthetic pathway

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

mutase/prephenate dehydratase (PheA) also catalyzes
the first step in the parallel biosynthetic pathways for
L-TYR and L-PHE as well as the second step in L-PHE
biosynthetic pathway (prephenate to phenylpyruvate)
(Figure 1). The native enzyme is a dimer and each monomer contains a dehydratase active site, a mutase active site
and an L-PHE binding site. PheA enzyme is inhibited by
L-PHE (up to 90% of the prephenate dehydratase and 55%
of the mutase activity) [1,2]. Feedback-resistant mutants
of TyrA and PheA E. coli enzymes have been used for the
efficient overproduction of L-TYR [11,17,57,67] and L-PHE
[55,76] in combination with some of the previously described alterations in CCM and the SHK pathway (Table 1).
An alternative approach to take advantage of the natural
feedback-resistant diversity in the TyrA enzyme family was
the expression of the TyrCfbr enzyme (cyclohexadienyl
dehydrogenase) from Z. mobilis and the CHA mutase
domain of native PheA from E. coli, relieving rate-limiting
steps and increasing the carbon flux towards L-TYR [57].
A strategy to minimize carbon loss to competing
pathways was exemplified in the CHA node with the
construction of L-PHE production strains expressing
TyrA enzymes containing tags for increased proteolytic
degradation, instead of completely removing the enzyme. The resultant strains have the advantage of not
being auxotrophic to L-TYR while displaying a higher
L-PHE/L-TYR production ratio than the strain containing
the wild-type TyrA [77].
Additional modifications applied in L-TRP overproducers
include the overexpression of exporter protein YddG
[61,78,79], the inactivation of permeases AroP, Mtr and
TnaB to avoid re-internalization [61,79,80], the deletion of gene tnaA coding for a tryptophanase to avoid
product degradation [59,81,82] and expression of genes
included in the tryptophan biosynthetic branch, including a feedback-resistant version of anthranilate
synthase, TrpEfbr [60,81].
Variations on the strategies described in this section
have also been applied to the production of other valuable compounds derived from the AAA pathway such
as phenyllactate, phenylacetate and phenylethanol [83],
L-DOPA [84], mandelic acid [85], deoxyviolacein and
violacein [82,86], avenanthramides [87], and resveratrol
[88] (Table 2).
Increasing the genetic engineering repertoire:
development and application of synthetic biology
strategies and techniques

The field of synthetic biology has been continuously
evolving and it is now acknowledged that this discipline is
primarily concerned with the design and characterization
of biological parts [89,90]. Indeed, modular and predictable
parts find many applications in the modification of cellular metabolism, whether these alterations are direct

Page 6 of 15

(modulation of the expression and function of enzymes
comprised in metabolic pathways) or indirect (rewiring
and repositioning of sensing components and cellular
effectors). In this sense, the powerful recent advances
in synthesis and assembly of macromolecules have
changed the way to approach challenges in metabolic
engineering. This has helped to generate a degree of
biological diversity and reprogramming not previously
reached with traditional biological controllers, promoting
the merging of rational and combinatorial approaches to
direct cellular design [91,92].
The aromatic biosynthetic pathway in E. coli was no
exception to this paradigm shift, resulting in notable
accomplishments over the last years. It is worth noting
that even when the upregulation of a few genes can increase the carbon flux from CCM towards the aromatic
biosynthetic pathway, the outcome is importantly influenced by a variety of factors, such as the combination of
expression modules, genetic background and cultivation
conditions. It is therefore ideal to design experiments to
obtain a characterization of the contribution of each factor
to the phenotype. Illustrative examples on this subject
include the assessment of differences in the production
of L-TYR by overexpressing various sets of genes in a
stepwise approach (Table 1) [58,93].
The generation of synthetic parts in a faster, cheaper
and more targeted way has also enabled metabolic engineers to reach unprecedented biochemical diversity,
exemplified by the production of plant compounds using
precursors present in the aromatic biosynthetic pathway
in E. coli. In this way, combinations of simultaneous transcriptional modules and genetic platforms have resulted in
strains with the ability to produce attractive compounds
such as salvianic acid A [94], δ-tocotrienol and its intermediate 2-methyl-6-geranylgeranyl-benzoquinol [95,96]
(Figure 2) and (S)-reticuline [97] (Figure 3).
Aside from the product titers reached so far, these approaches are appealing because the systematic evaluation
of conditions permits a more precise identification of
targets for future improvement. In this respect, more
structurally complex compounds can be produced by
the optimization of expression parameters, for example
when approaching problems with the heterologous insertion of genes and pathways into E. coli. One successful case concerning a systematic analysis of heterologous
expression is the production of (2S)-pinocembrin from
glucose as the only carbon source [98] (Figure 2). In this
report, the authors assembled gene expression modules,
including genes from the SHK pathway as well as heterologous sources. With this arrangement it was possible
to accumulate up to 40 mg/L of (2S)-pinocembrin, even
when using four plasmids and enzymes with naturally
low catalytic efficiencies. The same system was used to
evaluate the capabilities for resveratrol production after

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

Page 7 of 15

Table 2 Proposed applications of high-valued compounds derived from the aromatic pathway and synthesized by
engineered E. coli strains
Compound

Summary of pharmaceutical and industrial applications

Shikimate ((3R,4S,5R)-3,4,5-trihydroxycyclohexene-1carboxylic acid)

Antipyretic, antioxidant, anticoagulant, antithrombotic, anti-inflammatory, and
analgesic agent. Has a key role in the synthesis of important pharmacological
compounds such as anti-cancer and antibacterial agents, as well as hormones.
Substrate in the chemical synthesis of the antiviral Tamiflu®.

References
[72,74]

Salvianic acid or danshensu (3,4-dihydroxyphenyllactic acid) A naturally occurring plant polyphenolic acid, considered as a superior
antioxidant. Its scavenging activities against free hydroxyl radicals and
superoxide anion radicals are higher than vitamin C. Has a variety of other
pharmacological effects, including improving cerebral blood flow, inhibiting
platelet activation and arterial thrombosis, as well as anti-cancer and
anti-inflammatory effects.

[94]

(2S)-pinocembrin (5,7-dihydroxyflavanone)

Flavonoid with demonstrated activity decreasing the neurological scores,
alleviating brain edema, reducing the permeability of blood–brain barrier
and alleviating cerebral ischemic injury in the middle cerebral artery occlusion
in rats. Has been proposed as a novel therapeutic agent to reduce cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion and blood–brain injury, useful for its antioxidant and
anti-apoptotic effects.

[98]

Caffeic acid (3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid)

Possesses various pharmacological activities including antioxidant,
antitumoral, antiviral, antidepressive and antidiabetic functions.

[104]

Resveratrol (3,4',5-trihydroxystilbene)

Potential therapeutic effects in humans as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
anticancer, and chemopreventive agent.

[99]

Violacein ((3E)-3-[5-(5-hydroxy-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-oxo-1Hpyrrol-3-ylidene]-1H-indol-2-one) and deoxyviolacein

Activity against herpes simplex virus and pathogenic bacteria such as
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Violacein has shown
successful activity against leukemia, lung cancer, human uveal melanoma and
lymphoma cells, where it mediates apoptosis. It is also an interesting bio-dye
showing attractive color tone and stability.

[82]

PDC (2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylic acid)

Proposed as a novel starting material for several useful synthetic polymers
such as polyesters and polyamides.

[100]

(S)-reticuline ((1S)-1-[(3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)methyl]- Building block for benzylisoquinoline alkaloids, including the analgesic
6-methoxy-2-methyl-3,4-dihydro-1H-isoquinolin-7-ol)
compounds morphine and codeine, as well as the antibacterial agents
berberine and palmatine. Useful in the development of novel antimalarial
and anticancer drugs.

[97]

Hydroxytyrosol (3,4-dihydroxyphenylethanol)

Powerful antioxidant activity. Potential antitumoral, antiatherogenic,
anti-inflammatory and antiplatelet aggregation agent.

[106]

Avenanthramides

Natural hydroxycinnamoyl anthranilates with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and antiproliferative effects, considered to contribute to the health benefits
of oatmeal consumption. Potential antitumor activities.

[87]

δ-tocotrienol

Vitamin E component naturally produced by photosynthetic organisms. It has
shown to induce apoptosis and inhibit proliferation of cancer cells. Possess to
some extent neuroprotective, anticancer, and cholesterol lowering properties.

[95,96]

Recombinant pathways are presented in Figure 2 and Figure 3.

slight modifications were introduced to increase malonylCoA and L-TYR availability. This work revealed large
variations in the concentration of produced metabolites
with respect to small variations in the genetic constructs
[99] (Figure 2). In a similar approach, the introduction of a
foreign pathway succeeded in deviating carbon flow from
3-dehydroshikimate towards the synthesis of 2-pyrone4,6-dicarboxylic acid (PDC) (Figure 3). Strains overexpressing six different genes from three different plasmids
were able to produce the desired compound with a 17.3%
yield from glucose [100].
It is also interesting to consider other strategies to
generate and screen metabolic diversity, such as modifications of the global transcription machinery coupled
to high-throughput screening for metabolite production

[101,102]. By merging these approaches with combinatorial techniques for gene overexpression, a 114% increase in
L-TYR production from a previously engineered strain
was reported [101].
Strains with the capability to overproduce L-TYR from
simple carbon sources have been used as a backbone for
production of more structurally complex compounds.
For example, the construction of codon-optimized heterologous gene clusters with a wide span of strengths in
promoter and ribosome binding sequences (RBS) has
allowed the generation of E. coli strains capable of producing phenylpropanoic acids such as caffeic acid, coumaric
acid and ferulic acid [103-105] (Figure 2), as well as hydroxycinnamoyl anthranilates [87] and other derivatives, such
as hydroxytyrosol [106] (Figure 3). Another combinatorial

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

Page 8 of 15

CHA

L-TRP

ANT

Indole-3-pyruvic acid imine
vioA
vioB, vioE

L-PHE
b

p

aroF

pheAfbr

PRE

Protodeoxyviolacein acid

PAL

Malonate

vioC

Cinnamic acid

matC
c

p

PALop

4CLop

4CL

Malonate

Deoxyviolacein

n

p

vioA

o

c

vioE

vioB

vioC

vioD

4CL

vioD
vioC

Violacein

Cinnamoyl-CoA
d

p

CHSop

CHIop

matB

CHS

Pinocembrin chalcone

Malonyl-CoA
e

p

matBop

a

hpaBC

p

ldh

CHS

matCop

CHI

hpaBC

ldh

2S-Pinocembrin

Malonate

4-Hydroxyphenyllactate

Salvianic acid

HPP

matC

PYR

GAP

hpaBC

Hpd

3,4-Dihydroxyphenylpyruvate

Malonate

ldh

Homogentisic acid

Dxs
Idi
CrtE

matB

4-Coumaric acid

L-TYR
TAL

Hpt

GGPP

Coumaroyl-CoA

Malonyl-CoA

k

p

TAL

l

p

STS

m

p

matB

4CL
Coum3H

Coum3H

Sam5

GGH

Caffeic acid

MGGBQ
-Tocopherol

Caffeoyl-CoA
Thioesterase

STS

COM

Resveratrol

Cyc / VTE1

Ferulic acid

i

p

TALop

j

p

Coum3Hop

matC

-Tocotrienol
h
f

p

ggh

crtE

hpt

hpd

vte1

g

c

crtE

hpt

hpd

idi

dxs

p

opTAL

Sam5

COM

Figure 2 Biosynthetic pathways for the production of diverse aromatic metabolites by combination of heterologous expression
modules with the overproduction of intermediates from SHK- and terminal AAA pathways in Escherichia coli. Salvianic acid from HPP: (a)
hpaBC (codes for an endogenous hydroxylase) of E. coli and ldh (lactate dehydrogenase) of Lactobacillus pentosus [94]. 2S-pinocembrin from L-PHE and
malonyl-CoA: (b) aroF and pheAfbr of E. coli; (c) PAL (phenylalanine ammonia lyase) of Rhodotorula glutinis and 4CL (4-coumarate-CoA ligase) of
Petroselium crispum; (d) CHS (chalcone synthase) of Petunia x hybrida and CHI (chalcone isomerase) of Medicago sativa; (e) matB and matC
(coding for malonate synthetase and malonate carrier protein) of Rhizobium trifolii [98]. δ-tocotrienol (f) via MGGBQ (2-methyl-6-geranylgeranylbenzoquinol) (g) from HPP and δ-tocopherol via GGPP (geranylgeranylpyrophosphate): ggh (geranylgeranylpyrophosphate reductase) of
Synechocystis sp., crtE (geranylgeranylpyrophosphate synthase) of Pantoea ananatis, hpt (homogentisate phytyltransferase) of Synechocystis sp., hpd
(p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase) of Pseudomonas putida, vte1 (tocopherol-cyclase) of Arabidopsis thaliana [95], idi (isopentenyl-diphosphate
isomerase) and dxs (1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase) of E. coli [96]. Caffeic and ferulic acids from L-TYR: (h) TAL (tyrosine ammonia lyase) and
Sam5 (4-coumarate hydroxylase) of Saccharothrix espanaensis and COM (caffeic acid methyltransferase) of Arabidopsis thaliana [103]; (i) TAL of
R. glutinis and (j) Coum3H (4-coumarate hydroxylase) of S. espanaensis [104]. Resveratrol from L-TYR and malonyl-CoA: (k) TAL of R. glutinis and 4CL of
P. crispum; (l) STS (stilbene synthase) of Vitis vinifera; (m) matB and matC of R. trifolii [99]. Deoxyviolacein and violacein from L-TRP: (n) vioABCD genes
of Chromobacterium violaceum and (o) vioE of Janthinobacterium lividum [82]. Continuous arrows show unique enzymatic reactions; dashed arrows
show several enzymatic reactions. GAP: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. c, indicates chromosomal integration. p, indicates plasmid expression module. fbr,
feedback resistant gene. op, codon-optimized gene. ↱, promoter.

technique applied in the generation and isolation of strains
with an increased production of indigo (a compound
that can be obtained from the L-TRP biosynthetic
intermediate indole) is coselection MAGE (multiplex
automated genome engineering). This method relies
on a cyclical oligo-mediated allelic replacement to
modify genomic targets [107] that was later improved by
linking the process with the recovery of an inactivated
selection marker, enhancing the size and efficiency of
insertions [108]. With this approach, the authors were
able to insert T7 promoters upstream of 12 genes or
operons associated with the AAA pathway in a strain
modified to produce indigo and recovered 80 unique
derivatives with variable promoter insertions. As a result, it was possible to identify strains with more than a
fourfold improvement in indigo production over the
ancestor strain, as well as synergetic interactions of
expressed genes [108].

The application of synthetic RNA devices with the
goal of increasing AAA production in E. coli has recently attracted attention. In particular, artificial riboswitches coupling the binding of L-TRP to growth under
a selective pressure have been constructed and tested
in vivo. By modulating the expression of gene aroG
under this scheme, strains with superior capabilities for
L-TRP production could be linked to the increased growth
rates after rounds of selective improvement [109]. In another report, a synthetic sRNA library was constructed for
targeted gene expression silencing. The authors demonstrated the applicability of this approach in the production
of L-TYR with the plasmid-based expression of genes
ppsA, tktA, aroF, aroK, tyrC, aroG and tyrA, and the simultaneous silencing of genes tyrR, csrA, pgi and ppc in several
E. coli strains. With an easily transferrable gene-regulation
platform, the combination of expression levels and genetic backgrounds led to the selection of a strain that can

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

a

p

aroFfbr

aroB

b

p

ubiC

pobA

c

p

LigABC

PDC

DHS

qutC

CHMS

PCA

LigC

Page 9 of 15

NER

LigAB

pobA

pHBA

ubiC

ANT

COUA

L-TYR

DHPR

TAL

pterin cofactor
regeneration
system

PCD

CHA

TH

COUA3H

SHK

p

ydiB

aroD

aroB

aroGfbr

ppsA

tktA

CAFA

4CL

4CL

TYR

p

tyrB

tyrAfbr

aroC

aroA

aroL

COU-CoA

CAF-CoA

AvnDF

p

HCBT

4CL1

tal

hpaB

hpaC

tktA

ppsA

DODC

MAOop

TYR

HCBT
HCBT

L-DOPA
DDC

DODC

AvnD

AvnF

NCS

(S)-Norlaudanosoline

Dopamine
TYO
g

p

THop

DHPRop

MAO

PCDop

d

p

tyrAfbr

aroGfbr

e

p

NCS

TYR

f

p

6OMT

6OMT

3,4-DHPAA
h

p

DDC

(S)-3-Hydroxycoclaurine

TYO

adhP

CNMT

(S)-3-Hydroxy-N-methylcoclaurine

4´OMT

CNMT

4´OMT

Hydroxytyrosol

(S)-Reticuline

Figure 3 Biosynthetic pathways for the production of diverse aromatic metabolites by combination of heterologous expression
modules with the overproduction of intermediates from SHK- and terminal L-TYR pathways in Escherichia coli. PDC (2-pyrone-4,6dicarboxylic acid) from DHS and CHA: (a) aroFfbr and aroB of E. coli; (b) ubiC (chorismate pyruvate-lyase) and pobA (4-hydroxybenzoate
hydroxylase) of E. coli and Pseudomonas putida, respectively; (c) LigAB (protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase) and LigC (CHMS dehydrogenase) of
Sphingobium sp. SYK-6 and qutC (dehydroshikimate dehydratase) of Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans [100]. (S)-Reticuline from L-TYR: (d) tyrAfbr,
aroGfbr, tktA and ppsA of E. coli; (e) NCS (norcoclaurine synthetase) of Coptis japonica, TYR (tyrosinase) of Streptomyces castaneoglobisporus, DODC
(DOPA decarboxylase) of Pseudomonas putida and MAO (monoamine oxidase) of Micrococcus luteus; (f) 6OMT (norcoclaurine 6-O-methyltransferase),
4′OMT (3′-hydroxy-N-methylcoclaurine 4′-O-methyltransferase) and CNMT (coclaurine-N-methyltransferase) of C. japonica [97]. Hydroxytyrosol from L-TYR
via 3,4-DHPAA (3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde): (g) PCD (pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase) and DHPR (dihydropteridine reductase) of human
and TH (tyrosine hydroxylase) of mouse; (h) DDC (L-DOPA decarboxylase) of pig and TYO (tyramine oxidase) of M. luteus [106]. Avenanthramides
AvnD [N-(4′-hydroxycinnamoyl)-anthranilic acid] and AvnF [N-(3′,4′-dihydroxycinnamoyl)-anthranilic acid] from L-TYR and ANT: AvnDF module,
tal (tyrosine ammonia-lyase) of Rhodotorula glutinis, 4CL1 (4-coumarate-CoA ligase) of Nicotiana tabacum, COUA3H (SAM5) (p-coumarate
3-hydroxylase) of Saccharothrix espanesis, HCBT (hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyl-CoA/anthranilate N-hydroxycinnamoyl/benzoyltransferase) of
Dianthus caryophyllus and hpaBC (code for an endogenous hydroxylase) of E. coli. SHK and TYR modules contain endogenous genes of E. coli
[56]. PCA (protocatechuate); CHMS (4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde); CAFA (caffeate); CAF-CoA (caffeoyl-CoA); COUA
(p-coumarate); COU-CoA (p-coumaroyl-CoA); adhP (alcohol dehydrogenase of E. coli). p, indicates plasmid expression module. fbr, feedback
resistant gene. op, codon-optimized gene. ↱, promoter. NER, Non-enzymatic reaction.

accumulate up to 21.9 g/L of L-TYR in high-density cultures [110].
Integration and application of data: systems-based
approaches to the production of AAA

Even with the relative success obtained so far regarding
the overproduction of aromatic compounds in E. coli,
insights into the global metabolic state of engineered
strains under production conditions are still scarce.
Moreover, the effects of targeted strain modifications are
typically underestimated, since they do not always result
in significant differences in cell growth or production of
specific metabolites. Combination of techniques such as

genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and
fluxomics can unravel the particular cellular state during
a defined condition by providing snapshots of different
levels of metabolism [111]. However, in order to turn this
information into knowledge of new potential engineering
targets, adequate comparisons must be established. Since
it is not trivial to define the type and extent of data to be
extracted and compared, systems biology approaches are
needed to manage holistic information at different levels
of cellular functions [112,113].
Although the systematic integration of -omics approaches
have been applied to characterize and reverse engineer bacterial strains producing several amino acids [6,114-117],

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

there are still relatively few reports on the use of these
techniques with AAA overproducers. For example, one
study reports the effect of inactivating genes coding for
PEP-consuming enzymes (PTS, PykF and PykA) over the
flux distributions in the central carbon metabolism as an
attempt to increase the availability of this AAA precursor
[33]. The net result of either inactivation was a flux increase to biomass formation pathways, but several differences on important CCM nodes were also found
between all conditions. Furthermore, PTS inactivation
revealed a carbon recycling response between PEP and
OAA combined with a reduced glycolytic flux. When
these strains were transformed with plasmids encoding
enzymes to promote the production of L-PHE, a 19-,
14-, and 25- fold increase on the yield of this amino
acid was observed for the PTS, PTS− pykA, and PTS−
pykF mutants, respectively [33].
Targeted proteomics and metabolite profiling analyses
are also very valuable to provide feedback about expression systems used in the production of AAA. One report
describes such approaches on a collection of L-TYR
producing strains with different gene-expression arrays,
allowing the authors to identify and improve sub-optimally
expressed genes. After a second engineering round of
the synthetic expression modules a strain was constructed
which can produce L-TYR from glucose with 80% of the
theoretical yield, estimated as 0.55 g/g in strains with a
functional PTS [58]. A related work characterized the
impact on SHK pathway enzyme levels resulting from
the removal of TyrR regulator, along with the use of a
feedback-resistant TyrA and deletion of the pheA gene
on L-TYR producing strains. The results showed that
small changes in protein levels caused by the genetic alterations can have a big impact on metabolite production, as a 250-fold span of L-TYR concentrations were
detected [118]. A different work found many proteins
differentially expressed as a response to the sole inactivation
of the pykF gene, including DAHP synthase (AroG), SHK
dehydrogenase (AroE), SHK kinase I (AroK), CHA synthase (AroC), prephenate dehydratase (PheA), anthranilate
synthase (TrpD, TrpE) and L-TRP synthase (TrpA), as
compared to the wild type strain [119].
In another example, transcriptional analysis and whole
genome sequencing studies were performed on L-TYR
producing strains obtained by combinatorial and targeted
approaches, coupled to high-throughput screening, in an
attempt to discover the changes that led to higher L-TYR
production [101]. The transcriptional analysis revealed
upregulation of genes related to acid stress resistance
and global reductions in the expression of several pathways
such as ribosomal protein and RNA formation, fatty
acid elongation, de novo purine/pyrimidine biosynthesis
and DNA replication, which imply a cellular shift from
proliferation and growth to maintenance and stress

Page 10 of 15

survival. Genomic analyses revealed differential single
base-pair changes between the studied strains. When
these mutations were reintroduced on a parental strain
background higher L-TYR production was observed,
showing their contributions to the overproduction phenotype. Finally, a reverse engineered strain was constructed,
which gave a titer of 902 mg/L and an L-TYR yield on
glucose of 0.18 g/g on a genetically-defined background
[101]. Other works have also characterized the global
transcriptional response to the presence of high levels of
L-PHE or SHK in simple and complex media [120,121] or
starvation conditions [122], revealing metabolic information that can be used for further improvement of the
strains and cultivation conditions.
Along with data obtained by high-throughput systems,
modeling of metabolism by mathematical approaches has
become an important tool for analyzing cell responses and
unravel the metabolic regulation between the cell information/control systems [111]. Moreover, genome-scale models
of metabolism have been analyzed by constraint-based approaches [123]. Gene deletion effects over flux distributions
have also been studied in order to find the combination
that provides the best metabolic performance on a given
condition. For example, the deletion impact of 1261 genes
was modeled using a reconstruction of biochemical interactions, resulting in 195 genes exerting high impact on flux
distributions in various metabolic subsystems [124]. A strategy developed to circumvent the need for kinetic parameters of enzymes present in a metabolic network is ensemble
modeling, which uses phenotypic data obtained from overexpression and deletion of enzymes to screen out flux distributions from an initial ensemble of solutions derived
from elementary reaction models [125]. This method has
been used to model the AAA pathway for DAHP production with data obtained from the overexpression of CCM
genes. A subset of flux distributions was found capable of
describing the phenotypic characteristics of the strains and
rendered information about the kinetic and stoichiometric
limitations around PEP and E4P nodes [125]. As more genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic functional interactions
continue to be unraveled, similar approaches will become
powerful tools to model specific metabolic outcomes
related to AAA biosynthesis.
Bioprocess engineering: optimization of AAA
compound production

In order to create economically viable products, the
processes developed and tested at laboratory scale have
to be adapted to larger operational volumes. Although
engineered strains should ideally perform equally in 1 L
scale as in industrial scales (going from 500–10,000 L for
fine chemicals to more than 100,000 L for commodity
chemicals), a significant reduction in performance as a
result of scale-up is often observed [126]. Therefore, it

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

is important to apply strategies to prevent physiological
changes caused by heterogeneities of fermentation parameters during scale-up processes with E. coli. Stress-mediated
cellular responses to chemical and physical factors can
negatively impact as much as 60% over the productivity,
the biomass and product yields when a strain is exposed to
large-scale production conditions [127,128].
Fed-batch cultivations have been a popular method to
produce aromatic compounds since they promote high
cellular densities, offer tight control over the μ and substrate concentrations, and permit a better management
of dissolved oxygen tension (DOT) to prevent the activation of fermentative pathways [16,129]. In one example,
a fed-batch strategy improved violacein production from
arabinose (through an expanded pathway from L-TRP)
by adjusting the μ at 0.011 h−1 [82]. With this procedure,
cellular concentrations with optical density values up to
70 were reached, producing 710 mg/L of violacein and
avoiding acetate accumulation in the medium, a known
inhibitor of growth and pigment production.
Another work studied the impact of different feeding
strategies over the production of L-TRP in a recombinant
strain [16]. An increase in the volumetric productivity of
this compound was reached by a novel feeding strategy
with a highly concentrated glucose solution (800 g/L) after
the exhaustion of the initial glucose. By using a combined
pseudo-exponential feeding at the exponential phase and
a glucose-stat feeding after the exponential phase, an efficient control over the μ was achieved (below the acetic
acid production threshold), reaching 38.8 g/L of L-TRP.
This represented an increase of 19.9% due to reduced
acetic acid accumulation [16].
Even if feeding strategies can cope to some extent with
the problems derived from acetic acid production, a
combination of these with genetic modifications has
also been tested for the production of aromatic compounds. In a recent report, the effect of inactivating
the gene coding for the enzyme phosphotransacetylase
(Pta) over the production of L-TRP was assessed. By
combining this modification with the use of a DO-stat
for controlling inflow rate at a suitable DOT, the authors
were able to increase the production of L-TRP and biomass
while maintaining the growth rate and reducing the accumulation of acetic acid [129].
Substrate characteristics can also be optimization
variables for the production of AAA pathway intermediates. One example is the evaluation of glycerol for
L-PHE production [130,131]. The low cost of glycerol
coupled with its higher degree of carbon reduction
when compared to other sugars such as glucose, could
result in high energy yield per carbon and hence be advantageous for AAA production processes. However, it
is important to characterize the influence of fermentation
parameters such as DOT, temperature and pH, as well as

Page 11 of 15

the availability of substrates, over the growth and product
formation rates. In one report, variations in oxygen supply
(by changing aeration rates and impeller speeds) were
tested over the L-PHE production capabilities of a recombinant strain growing on glycerol [130]. With this
approach, a direct correlation between biomass and L-PHE
production rates were found at impeller speeds up to
400 rpm, being this the maximum operational value
before shear stress starts to diminish strain capabilities.
After setting the impeller speed to 400 rpm, aeration
optimization resulted in the highest product yield obtained, 0.58 g/g, which is 20% higher than the yields
obtained before optimization of oxygen supply. Interestingly, the authors report this high yield with a strain
in which the only recombinant measure taken is the
heterologous expression of a phenylalanine dehydrogenase gene [130]. On the other hand, another group
has recently reported the production of 13 g/L of L-PHE
from glycerol and a yield of 0.15 g/g using a multi-phase
fed-batch process with a strain containing several genetic
modifications [131] (Table 1).
Product characteristics should also be taken into account
when developing an efficient bioprocess. For example,
L-TYR exhibits low solubility in typical fermentation
conditions, triggering its precipitation when saturation
is reached. This characteristic would normally be beneficial for a fermentation process, as a precipitated compound can be easily recovered and it is not expected to
affect strain physiology and production capabilities.
Interestingly, one report described that the L-TYR
crystals can stabilize foam, causing operational problems
during fermentation [17]. Consequently, this foaming
process was studied on 10 and 200 L fed-batch fermentations for L-TYR production to assess the effect of pH, antifoam concentration, cooling rate, L-PHE concentration
and seeding level on foam production. It was determined
that high concentrations of L-PHE or antifoam, as well as
low pH and low seeding, are the preferred conditions to
avoid detrimental foaming production. With this approach
it was possible to produce L-TYR from glucose with a
yield of 0.3 g/g and titers as high as 55 g/L on a 200 L
scale [17]. Moreover, this study revealed important data
for the design of an economically feasible process for the
production of L-TYR.
Process optimization could also be concerned with
an enhancement of the strain ability to withstand high
concentrations of aromatic compounds, not only for
toxic final products but for harmful intermediates or
byproducts, which often accumulate as a consequence
of the suboptimal alleviation of control levels in the
biosynthetic pathways. This is a commonly-encountered
problem with many of the intermediates and final products in the AAA. For example, one group reported the
optimization of L-TRP production by modifying the export

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

and import capabilities of a modified strain in order to
minimize its intracellular concentration and avoid feedback control by product accumulation [79]. This group
constructed a strain featuring the plasmid-based overexpression of the AAA exporter YddG, resulting in a production increase of 12.6% compared to the parental
strain on a 30 L fermentation. Another example of the
successful combination of genetic and fermentation
procedures involves the construction of a strain for L-PHE
overproduction with a PTS-independent glucose transport
and expression of feedback-resistant versions of AroG and
PheA. By overexpressing genes ydiB, aroK and tyrB with a
temperature-dependent system, as well as yddG in a TyrA−
background, the authors were able to produce up to 47 g/L
of L-PHE with a yield of 0.25 g/g from glucose in a 15 L
fed-batch process [132].
Finally, bioprocess design is also an important factor
in optimization of the production of aromatic pathway
derivatives. The bioconversion of phenylpyruvate (PPN)
to L-PHE was studied with an immobilized cell bioprocess
[133]. This technique has several advantages such as the
ability to reuse the immobilized cells, the capacity to utilize
high cell densities and improved stability of the system. For
example, a mixed-gel surface composed of k-carrageenan
and gelatin, together with the optimization of its composition to enhance the mechanical strength and reduce the
toxicity and solidification point was used as biomass carrier
for the production of L-PHE [133]. Studies on the effect of
pH, temperature, Mg+2 and trehalose presence resulted in
the implementation of a process showing an improvement
of 80% on the L-PHE conversion from PPN after 15 successive batch experiments.

Conclusions
The present review aims to provide a panorama of the
current achievements and newly found goals related to
the production of aromatic compounds in E. coli. The
AAA pathway and the metabolic changes resulting from
its deregulation have attracted the interest of metabolic
engineers for many years and remain important research
targets on several organisms. It is evident that the establishment of efficient bioprocesses on this topic requires
the design and implementation of multidisciplinary strategies, taking advantage of the fast-paced developments
coming from nearly all biotechnological fields but particularly from those related with information technologies, such as systems and synthetic biology. The works
compiled here are a good example of the benefits obtained
when new ideas and viewpoints are introduced to an established field in order to cope with long-known problems.
From the comparisons presented, it is noticeable that the
use of rational and combinatorial approaches powered by
the ability to develop complex genetic circuits and highthroughput screenings of new producers has set new trends

Page 12 of 15

when dealing with the production of aromatic compounds
in E. coli. The benefits of the integral application of these
technologies can already be observed, not only from the
improved production processes for AAA and pathway
intermediates with large and established markets, but
also with the generation of novel derivative compounds
with important pharmaceutical applications.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
All authors participated in the preparation of this contribution. AR had a
major role in writing and editing the manuscript. All authors have read and
approved the final version.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by CONACYT 105782, 177568 and DGAPA-PAPIIT
UNAM IN206812 grants.
Received: 30 May 2014 Accepted: 17 August 2014

References
1. Keseler IM, Mackie A, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A, Gama-Castro S,
Bonavides-Martinez C, Fulcher C, Huerta AM, Kothari A, Krummenacker M,
Latendresse M, Muniz-Rascado L, Ong Q, Paley S, Schroder I, Shearer AG,
Subhraveti P, Travers M, Weerasinghe D, Weiss V, Collado-Vides J, Gunsalus
RP, Paulsen I, Karp PD: EcoCyc: fusing model organism databases with
systems biology. Nucleic Acids Res 2013, 41:D605–D612.
2. Sprenger G: Aromatic Amino Acids. In Amin Acid Biosynth - Pathways, Regul
Metab Eng. Edited by Wendisch VF. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2007:418
[Microbiology Monographs, vol. 5].
3. Herrmann KM, Weaver LM: The shikimate pathway. Annu Rev Plant Biol
1999, 50:473–503.
4. Richards TA, Dacks JB, Campbell SA, Blanchard JL, Foster PG, McLeod R,
Roberts CW: Evolutionary origins of the eukaryotic shikimate pathway:
gene fusions, horizontal gene transfer, and endosymbiotic replacements.
Eukaryot Cell 2006, 5:1517–1531.
5. Lütke-Eversloh T, Santos CNS, Stephanopoulos G: Perspectives of
biotechnological production of L-tyrosine and its applications. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 2007, 77:751–762.
6. Becker J, Wittmann C: Systems and synthetic metabolic engineering for
amino acid production - the heartbeat of industrial strain development.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2012, 23:718–726.
7. Ikeda M, Takeno S: Amino acid production by Corynebacterium
glutamicum. In Corynebacterium glutamicum. Volume 23. Edited by Yukawa
H, Inui M. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2013:107–147.
8. Ajinomoto Co. Inc: FY2013 Market and Other Information. 2014.
9. Li Z, Ji X, Kan S, Qiao H, Jian M, Lu D, Wang J, Huang H, Jia H, Ouyuang P,
Ying H: Past, Present and Future Industrial Biotechnology in China.
In Biotechnol China II Chem Energy Environ. Edited by Tsao GT, Ouyang P,
Chen J. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2010:1–42.
10. Bongaerts J, Krämer M, Müller U, Raeven L, Wubbolts M: Metabolic
engineering for microbial production of aromatic amino acids and
derived compounds. Metab Eng 2001, 3:289–300.
11. Sprenger GA: From scratch to value: Engineering Escherichia coli wild
type cells to the production of L-phenylalanine and other fine chemicals
derived from chorismate. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2007, 75:739–749.
12. Pittard J, Yang J: Biosynthesis of the Aromatic Amino Acids. Eco Sal Plus
2008, 1.
13. Orth JD, Conrad TM, Na J, Lerman JA, Nam H, Feist AM, Palsson BØ:
A comprehensive genome-scale reconstruction of Escherichia coli
metabolism-2011. Mol Syst Biol 2011, 7.
14. Klein-Marcuschamer D, Santos CNS, Yu H, Stephanopoulos G: Mutagenesis
of the bacterial RNA polymerase alpha subunit for improvement of
complex phenotypes. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009, 75:2705–2711.
15. Jeong J, Cho N, Jung D, Bang D: Genome-scale genetic engineering in
Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Adv 2013, 31:804–810.

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

16. Cheng L-K, Wang J, Xu Q-Y, Xie X-X, Zhang Y-J, Zhao C-G, Chen N: Effect of
feeding strategy on L-tryptophan production by recombinant Escherichia
coli. Ann Microbiol 2012, 62:1625–1634.
17. Patnaik R, Zolandz RR, Green DA, Kraynie DF: L-Tyrosine production by
recombinant Escherichia coli : Fermentation optimization and recovery.
Biotechnol Bioeng 2008, 99:741–752.
18. Ikeda M: Amino acid production processes. In Microb Prod L-amino acids.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2003:1–35.
19. Gosset G: Production of aromatic compounds in bacteria. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 2009, 20:651–658.
20. Westerhoff HV, Palsson BO: The evolution of molecular biology into
systems biology. Nat Biotechnol 2004, 22:1249–1252.
21. Blazeck J, Alper H: Systems metabolic engineering: Genome-scale models
and beyond. Biotechnol J 2010, 5:647–659.
22. Postma PW, Lengeler JW, Jacobson GR: Phosphoenolpyruvate:
carbohydrate phosphotransferase systems of bacteria. Microbiol Rev 1993,
57:543–594.
23. Gosset G: Improvement of Escherichia coli production strains by
modification of the phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar phosphotransferase
system. Microb Cell Fact 2005, 4:14.
24. Escalante A, Salinas-Cervantes A, Gosset G, Bolívar F: Current knowledge of the
Escherichia coli phosphoenolpyruvate–carbohydrate phosphotransferase
system: peculiarities of regulation and impact on growth and product
formation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2012, 94:1483–1494.
25. Sauer U, Eikmanns BJ: The PEP – pyruvate – oxaloacetate node as the
switch point for carbon flux distribution in bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev
2005, 29:765–794.
26. Sprenger G, Siewe R, Martin K, Sonke T: Microbial Preparation of Substances
from Aromatic Metabolism/I. WO patent 98/18936. 1998.
27. Frost JW, Knop DR: Biocatalytic Synthesis of Shikimic Acid. US patent
6,472,169 B1. 2002.
28. Chandran SS, Yi J, Draths KM, Von Daeniken R, Weber W, Frost JW:
Phosphoenolpyruvate availability and the biosynthesis of shikimic acid.
Biotechnol Prog 2003, 19:808–814.
29. Yi J, Draths KM, Li K, Frost JW: Altered glucose transport and shikimate
pathway product yields in E. coli. Biotechnol Prog 2003, 19:1450–1459.
30. Balderas-Hernandez VE, Sabido-Ramos A, Silva P, Cabrera-Valladares N,
Hernandez-Chavez G, Baez-Viveros JL, Martinez A, Bolivar F, Gosset G:
Metabolic engineering for improving anthranilate synthesis from glucose
in Escherichia coli. Microb Cell Fact 2009, 8:19.
31. Flores N, Xiao J, Bolivar F, Valle F: Pathway engineering for the
production of aromatic compounds in Escherichia coli. Nat Biotechnol
1996, 14:620–623.
32. Valle F, Mejia N, Berry A: Application of Glucose Transport Mutants for
Production of Aromatic Pathway Compounds. WO patent 96/34961. 1996.
33. Meza E, Becker J, Bolivar F, Gosset G, Wittmann C: Consequences of
phosphoenolpyruvate: sugar phosphotranferase system and pyruvate
kinase isozymes inactivation in central carbon metabolism flux
distribution in Escherichia coli. Microb Cell Fact 2012, 11:127.
34. Sabido A, Sigala JC, Hernández-Chávez G, Flores N, Gosset G, Bolívar F:
Physiological and transcriptional characterization of Escherichia coli
strains lacking interconversion of phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate
when glucose and acetate are coutilized. Biotechnol Bioeng 2014,
111:1150–1160.
35. Patnaik R, Liao JC: Engineering of Escherichia coli central metabolism for
aromatic metabolite production with near theoretical yield. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1994, 60:3903–3908.
36. Liao JC: Microorganisms and Methods for Overproduction of DAHP by Cloned
pps Gene. WO patent 96/08567. 1996.
37. Yi J, Li K, Draths KM, Frost JW: Modulation of phosphoenolpyruvate
synthase expression increases shikimate pathway product yields in
E. coli. Biotechnol Prog 2002, 18:1141–1148.
38. Liao JC, Hou SY, Chao YP: Pathway analysis, engineering, and
physiological considerations for redirecting central metabolism.
Biotechnol Bioeng 1996, 52:129–140.
39. Gulevich AY, Biryukova IV, Zimenkov DV, Skorokhodova AY, Kivero AD, Belareva
AV, Mashko SV: Method for Producing An L-amino Acid Using A Bacterium Having
Enhanced Expression of the pckA Gene. US Patent 2006/0035348 A1. 2006.
40. Tatarko M, Romeo T: Disruption of a global regulatory gene to enhance
central carbon flux into phenylalanine biosynthesis in Escherichia coli.
Curr Microbiol 2001, 43:26–32.

Page 13 of 15

41. Yakandawala N, Romeo T, Friesen AD, Madhyastha S: Metabolic
engineering of Escherichia coli to enhance phenylalanine production.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2008, 78:283–291.
42. Zhao G, Winkler ME: An Escherichia coli K-12 tktA tktB mutant deficient in
transketolase activity requires pyridoxine (vitamin B6) as well as the aromatic
amino acids and vitamins for growth. J Bacteriol 1994, 176:6134–6138.
43. Nakahigashi K, Toya Y, Ishii N, Soga T, Hasegawa M, Watanabe H, Takai Y,
Honma M, Mori H, Tomita M: Systematic phenome analysis of Escherichia
coli multiple-knockout mutants reveals hidden reactions in central
carbon metabolism. Mol Syst Biol 2009, 5:306.
44. Draths KM, Pompliano DL, Conley DL, Frost JW, Berry A, Disbrow GL, Staversky
RJ, Lievense JC: Biocatalytic synthesis of aromatics from D-Glucose: the role
of transketolase. J Am Chem Soc 1992, 114:3956–3962.
45. Patnaik R, Spitzer RG, Liao JC: Pathway engineering for production of
aromatics in Escherichia coli: confirmation of stoichiometric analysis by
independent modulation of AroG, TktA, and Pps activities. Biotechnol
Bioeng 1995, 46:361–370.
46. Báez JL, Bolívar F, Gosset G: Determination of 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate
7-phosphate productivity and yield from glucose in Escherichia coli devoid of
the glucose phosphotransferase transport system. Biotechnol Bioeng 2001,
73:530–535.
47. Lu J, Liao JC: Metabolic engineering and control analysis for production
of aromatics: role of transaldolase. Biotechnol Bioeng 1997, 53:132–138.
48. Mascarenhas D, Ashworth DJ, Chen CS: Deletion of pgi alters tryptophan
biosynthesis in a genetically engineered strain of Escherichia coli.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1991, 57:2995–2999.
49. Ahn J, Chung BKS, Lee D, Park M, Karimi IA, Jung J, Lee H: NADPH-dependent
pgi-gene knockout Escherichia coli metabolism producing shikimate on
different carbon sources. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2011, 324:10–16.
50. Rodriguez A, Martínez JA, Báez-Viveros JL, Flores N, Hernández-Chávez G,
Ramírez OT, Gosset G, Bolivar F: Constitutive expression of selected genes
from the pentose phosphate and aromatic pathways increases the
shikimic acid yield in high-glucose batch cultures of an Escherichia coli
strain lacking PTS and pykF. Microb Cell Fact 2013, 12:86.
51. Li K, Frost JW: Microbial synthesis of 3-dehydroshikimic acid: a comparative
analysis of D-xylose, L-arabinose, and D-glucose carbon sources. Biotechnol
Prog 1999, 15:876–883.
52. Martínez K, De Anda R, Hernández G, Escalante A, Gosset G, Ramírez OT,
Bolivar F: Coutilization of glucose and glycerol enhances the production
of aromatic compounds in an Escherichia coli strain lacking the
phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system.
Microb Cell Fact 2008, 7:1.
53. Ahn JO, Lee HW, Saha R, Park MS, Jung JK, Lee DY: Exploring the effects of
carbon sources on the metabolic capacity for shikimic acid production
in Escherichia coli using in silico metabolic predictions. J Microbiol
Biotechnol 2008, 18:1773–1784.
54. Chen K, Dou J, Tang S, Yang Y, Wang H, Fang H, Zhou C: Deletion of the
aroK gene is essential for high shikimic acid accumulation through the
shikimate pathway in E. coli. Bioresour Technol 2012, 119:141–147.
55. Báez-Viveros JL, Osuna J, Hernández-Chávez G, Soberón X, Bolívar F, Gosset
G: Metabolic engineering and protein directed evolution increase the
yield of L-phenylalanine synthesized from glucose in Escherichia coli.
Biotechnol Bioeng 2004, 87:516–524.
56. Liu S-P, Xiao M-R, Zhang L, Xu J, Ding Z-Y, Gu Z-H, Shi G-Y: Production of
L-phenylalanine from glucose by metabolic engineering of wild type
Escherichia coli W3110. Process Biochem 2013, 48:413–419.
57. Chavez-Bejar MI, Lara AR, Lopez H, Hernandez-Chavez G, Martinez A,
Ramirez OT, Bolivar F, Gosset G: Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli
for L-tyrosine production by expression of genes coding for the chorismate
mutase domain of the native chorismate mutase-prephenate dehydratase
and a cyclohexadienyl dehydrogenase from Zymomonas mobilis.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:3284–3290.
58. Juminaga D, Baidoo EEK, Redding-Johanson AM, Batth TS, Burd H, Mukhopadhyay
A, Petzold CJ, Keasling JD: Modular engineering of L-tyrosine production in
Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2012, 78:89–98.
59. Zhao Z-J, Zou C, Zhu Y-X, Dai J, Chen S, Wu D, Wu J, Chen J: Development
of L-tryptophan production strains by defined genetic modification in
Escherichia coli. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2011, 38:1921–1929.
60. Shen T, Liu Q, Xie X, Xu Q, Chen N: Improved production of tryptophan in
genetically engineered Escherichia coli with TktA and PpsA
overexpression. J Biomed Biotechnol 2012, 2012:1–8.

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

61. Wang J, Cheng L-K, Wang J, Liu Q, Shen T, Chen N: Genetic engineering of
Escherichia coli to enhance production of L-tryptophan. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 2013, 97:7587–7596.
62. Doroshenko VG, Tsyrenzhapova IS, Krylov AA, Kiseleva EM, Ermishev VY,
Kazakova SM, Biryukova IV, Mashko SV: Pho regulon promoter-mediated
transcription of the key pathway gene aroGFbr improves the
performance of an L-phenylalanine-producing Escherichia coli strain.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2010, 88:1287–1295.
63. Dell KA, Frost JW: Identification and removal of impediments to
biocatalytic synthesis of aromatics from D-Glucose: rate-limiting enzymes
in the common pathway of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. J Am
Chem Soc 1993, 115:11581–11589.
64. Krämer M, Bongaerts J, Bovenberg R, Kremer S, Müller U, Orf S, Wubbolts M,
Raeven L: Metabolic engineering for microbial production of shikimic
acid. Metab Eng 2003, 5:277–283.
65. Oldiges M, Kunze M, Degenring D, Sprenger GA, Takors R: Stimulation,
monitoring, and analysis of pathway dynamics by metabolic profiling
in the aromatic amino acid pathway. Biotechnol Prog 2004,
20:1623–1633.
66. Escalante A, Calderón R, Valdivia A, De Anda R, Hernández G, Ramírez OT,
Gosset G, Bolívar F: Metabolic engineering for the production of shikimic
acid in an evolved Escherichia coli strain lacking the
phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system.
Microb Cell Fact 2010, 9:21.
67. Lutke-Eversloh T, Stephanopoulos G: Feedback inhibition of chorismate
mutase/prephenate dehydrogenase (TyrA) of Escherichia coli: Generation
and characterization of tyrosine-insensitive mutants. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005, 71:7224–7228.
68. Cui Y-Y, Ling C, Zhang Y-Y, Huang J, Liu J-Z: Production of shikimic
acid from Escherichia coli through chemically inducible chromosomal
evolution and cofactor metabolic engineering. Microb Cell Fact
2014, 13:21.
69. Johansson L, Lindskog A, Silfversparre G, Cimander C, Nielsen KF, Lidén G:
Shikimic acid production by a modified strain of E. coli (W3110.shik1)
under phosphate-limited and carbon-limited conditions. Biotechnol
Bioeng 2005, 92:541–552.
70. Chen X, Li M, Zhou L, Shen W, Algasan G, Fan Y, Wang Z: Metabolic
engineering of Escherichia coli for improving shikimate synthesis from
glucose. Bioresour Technol 2014, 166:64–71.
71. Ghosh S, Chisti Y, Banerjee UC: Production of shikimic acid. Biotechnol Adv
2012, 30:1425–1431.
72. Rawat G, Tripathi P, Saxena RK: Expanding horizons of shikimic acid:
Recent progresses in production and its endless frontiers in application
and market trends. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2013, 97:4277–4287.
73. Tripathi P, Rawat G, Yadav S, Saxena RK: Fermentative production of
shikimic acid: a paradigm shift of production concept from plant route
to microbial route. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 2013, 36:1665–1673.
74. Estevez A, Estevez R: A short overview on the medicinal chemistry of
(—)-shikimic acid. Mini Rev Med Chem 2012, 12:1443–1454.
75. Salgado H, Peralta-Gil M, Gama-Castro S, Santos-Zavaleta A, Muñiz-Rascado
L, García-Sotelo JS, Weiss V, Solano-Lira H, Martínez-Flores I, Medina-Rivera
A, Salgado-Osorio G, Alquicira-Hernández S, Alquicira-Hernández K,
López-Fuentes A, Porrón-Sotelo L, Huerta AM, Bonavides-Martínez C,
Balderas-Martínez YI, Pannier L, Olvera M, Labastida A, Jiménez-Jacinto V,
Vega-Alvarado L, Del Moral-Chávez V, Hernández-Alvarez A, Morett E,
Collado-Vides J: RegulonDB v8.0: omics data sets, evolutionary
conservation, regulatory phrases, cross-validated gold standards and
more. Nucleic Acids Res 2013, 41(Database issue):D203–D213.
76. Báez-Viveros J, Flores N, Juárez K, Castillo-España P, Bolivar F, Gosset G:
Metabolic transcription analysis of engineered Escherichia coli strains
that overproduce L-phenylalanine. Microb Cell Fact 2007, 6:30.
77. Doroshenko VG, Shakulov RS, Kazakova SM, Kivero AD, Yampolskaya TA,
Mashko SV: Construction of an L-phenylalanine-producing
tyrosine-prototrophic Escherichia coli strain using tyrA ssrA-like
tagged alleles. Biotechnol Lett 2010, 32:1117–1121.
78. Doroshenko V, Airich L, Vitushkina M, Kolokolova A, Livshits V, Mashko S:
YddG from Escherichia coli promotes export of aromatic amino acids.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2007, 275:312–318.
79. Liu Q, Cheng Y, Xie X, Xu Q, Chen N: Modification of tryptophan transport
system and its impact on production of L-tryptophan in Escherichia coli.
Bioresour Technol 2012, 114:549–554.

Page 14 of 15

80. Gu P, Yang F, Li F, Liang Q, Qi Q: Knocking out analysis of tryptophan
permeases in Escherichia coli for improving L-tryptophan production.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2013, 97:6677–6683.
81. Gu P, Yang F, Kang J, Wang Q, Qi Q: One-step of tryptophan attenuator
inactivation and promoter swapping to improve the production of
L-tryptophan in Escherichia coli. Microb Cell Fact 2012, 11:30.
82. Rodrigues AL, Trachtmann N, Becker J, Lohanatha AF, Blotenberg J, Bolten
CJ, Korneli C, De Souza Lima AO, Porto LM, Sprenger GA, Wittmann C:
Systems metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for production of the
antitumor drugs violacein and deoxyviolacein. Metab Eng 2013, 20:29–41.
83. Koma D, Yamanaka H, Moriyoshi K, Ohmoto T, Sakai K: Production of aromatic
compounds by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli with an expanded
shikimate pathway. Appl Environ Microbiol 2012, 78:6203–6216.
84. Muñoz AJ, Hernández-Chávez G, Anda R, Martínez A, Bolívar F,
Gosset G: Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for improving
L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) synthesis from glucose.
J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2011, 38:1845–1852.
85. Sun Z, Ning Y, Liu L, Liu Y, Sun B, Jiang W, Yang C, Yang S: Metabolic
engineering of the L-phenylalanine pathway in Escherichia coli for the
production of S- or R-mandelic acid. Microb Cell Fact 2011, 10:71.
86. Rodrigues AL, Becker J, De Souza Lima AO, Porto LM, Wittmann C: Systems
metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for gram scale production of
the antitumor drug deoxyviolacein from glycerol. Biotechnol Bioeng 2014,
20:1–31.
87. Eudes A, Juminaga D, Baidoo EE, Collins FW, Keasling JD, Loqué D: Production
of hydroxycinnamoyl anthranilates from glucose in Escherichia coli.
Microb Cell Fact 2013, 12:62.
88. Lim CG, Fowler ZL, Hueller T, Schaffer S, Koffas MAG: High-yield resveratrol
production in engineered Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2011,
77:3451–3460.
89. Lynch SA, Gill RT: Synthetic biology: New strategies for directing design.
Metab Eng 2012, 14:205–211.
90. Luo Y, Lee J-K, Zhao H: Challenges and opportunities in synthetic biology
for chemical engineers. Chem Eng Sci 2013, 103:115–119.
91. Boyle PM, Silver PA: Parts plus pipes: Synthetic biology approaches to
metabolic engineering. Metab Eng 2012, 14:223–232.
92. Yadav VG, De Mey M, Giaw Lim C, Kumaran Ajikumar P, Stephanopoulos G:
The future of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology: Towards a
systematic practice. Metab Eng 2012, 14:233–241.
93. Lütke-Eversloh T, Stephanopoulos G: Combinatorial pathway analysis for
improved L-tyrosine production in Escherichia coli: identification of enzymatic
bottlenecks by systematic gene overexpression. Metab Eng 2008, 10:69–77.
94. Yao Y-F, Wang C-S, Qiao J, Zhao G-R: Metabolic engineering of Escherichia
coli for production of salvianic acid A via an artificial biosynthetic pathway.
Metab Eng 2013, 19:79–87.
95. Albermann C, Ghanegaonkar S, Lemuth K, Vallon T, Reuss M, Armbruster W,
Sprenger G a: Biosynthesis of the vitamin E compound delta-tocotrienol
in recombinant Escherichia coli cells. Chembiochem 2008, 9:2524–2533.
96. Ghanegaonkar S, Conrad J, Beifuss U, Sprenger G a, Albermann C: Towards
the in vivo production of tocotrienol compounds: engineering of a
plasmid-free Escherichia coli strain for the heterologous synthesis of 2methyl-6-geranylgeranyl-benzoquinol. J Biotechnol 2012, 164:238–247.
97. Nakagawa A, Minami H, Kim J-S, Koyanagi T, Katayama T, Sato F, Kumagai H:
A bacterial platform for fermentative production of plant alkaloids. Nat
Commun 2011, 2:326.
98. Wu J, Du G, Zhou J, Chen J: Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for
(2S)-pinocembrin production from glucose by a modular metabolic
strategy. Metab Eng 2013, 16:48–55.
99. Wu J, Liu P, Fan Y, Bao H, Du G, Zhou J, Chen J: Multivariate modular
metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli to produce resveratrol from
L-tyrosine. J Biotechnol 2013, 167:404–411.
100. Nakajima M, Nishino Y, Tamura M, Mase K, Masai E, Otsuka Y, Nakamura M,
Sato K, Fukuda M, Shigehara K, Ohara S, Katayama Y, Kajita S: Microbial
conversion of glucose to a novel chemical building block,
2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylic acid. Metab Eng 2009, 11:213–220.
101. Santos CNS, Xiao W, Stephanopoulos G: Rational, combinatorial, and
genomic approaches for engineering L-tyrosine production in
Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012, 109:13538–13543.
102. Alper H, Stephanopoulos G: Global transcription machinery engineering:
A new approach for improving cellular phenotype. Metab Eng 2007,
9:258–267.

Rodriguez et al. Microbial Cell Factories 2014, 13:126
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/126

103. Kang S-Y, Choi O, Lee JK, Hwang BY, Uhm T-B, Hong Y-S: Artificial biosynthesis
of phenylpropanoic acids in a tyrosine overproducing Escherichia coli strain.
Microb Cell Fact 2012, 11:153.
104. Zhang H, Stephanopoulos G: Engineering E. coli for caffeic acid
biosynthesis from renewable sugars. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2013,
97:3333–3341.
105. Huang Q, Lin Y, Yan Y: Caffeic acid production enhancement by
engineering a phenylalanine over-producing Escherichia coli strain.
Biotechnol Bioeng 2013, 110:3188–3196.
106. Satoh Y, Tajima K, Munekata M, Keasling JD, Lee TS: Engineering of L-tyrosine
oxidation in Escherichia coli and microbial production of hydroxytyrosol.
Metab Eng 2012, 14:603–610.
107. Wang HH, Isaacs FJ, Carr P a, Sun ZZ, Xu G, Forest CR, Church GM:
Programming cells by multiplex genome engineering and accelerated
evolution. Nature 2009, 460:894–898.
108. Wang HH, Kim H, Cong L, Jeong J, Bang D, Church GM: Genome-scale
promoter engineering by coselection MAGE. Nat Methods 2012, 9:591–593.
109. Yang J, Seo SW, Jang S, Shin S-I, Lim CH, Roh T-Y, Jung GY: Synthetic RNA
devices to expedite the evolution of metabolite-producing microbes.
Nat Commun 2013, 4:1413.
110. Na D, Yoo SM, Chung H, Park H, Park JH, Lee SY: Metabolic engineering of
Escherichia coli using synthetic small regulatory RNAs. Nat Biotechnol
2013, 31:170–174.
111. Shimizu K: Toward systematic metabolic engineering based on the
analysis of metabolic regulation by the integration of different levels of
information. Biochem Eng J 2009, 46:235–251.
112. Bro C, Nielsen J: Impact of “ome” analyses on inverse metabolic
engineering. Metab Eng 2004, 6:204–211.
113. Park JH, Lee SY, Kim TY, Kim HU: Application of systems biology for
bioprocess development. Trends Biotechnol 2008, 26:404–412.
114. Park JH, Lee SY: Towards systems metabolic engineering of
microorganisms for amino acid production. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2008,
19:454–460.
115. Bartek T, Blombach B, Lang S, Eikmanns BJ, Wiechert W, Oldiges M, Nöh K,
Noack S: Comparative 13C metabolic flux analysis of pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex-deficient, L-valine-producing Corynebacterium
glutamicum. Appl Environ Microbiol 2011, 77:6644–6652.
116. Becker J, Zelder O, Häfner S, Schröder H, Wittmann C: From zero to
hero — Design-based systems metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium
glutamicum for L-lysine production. Metab Eng 2011, 13:159–168.
117. Van Ooyen J, Noack S, Bott M, Reth A, Eggeling L: Improved L-lysine
production with Corynebacterium glutamicum and systemic insight into
citrate synthase flux and activity. Biotechnol Bioeng 2012, 109:2070–2081.
118. Singh P, Batth TS, Juminaga D, Dahl RH, Keasling JD, Adams PD, Petzold CJ:
Application of targeted proteomics to metabolically engineered
Escherichia coli. Proteomics 2012, 12:1289–1299.
119. Kedar P, Colah R, Shimizu K: Proteomic investigation on the pyk-F gene
knockout Escherichia coli for aromatic amino acid production.
Enzyme Microb Technol 2007, 41:455–465.
120. Polen T, Krämer M, Bongaerts J, Wubbolts M, Wendisch VF: The global
gene expression response of Escherichia coli to L-phenylalanine.
J Biotechnol 2005, 115:221–237.
121. Cortés-Tolalpa L, Gutiérrez-Ríos RM, Martínez LM, De Anda R, Gosset G,
Bolívar F, Escalante A: Global transcriptomic analysis of an engineered
Escherichia coli strain lacking the phosphoenolpyruvate: carbohydrate
phosphotransferase system during shikimic acid production in rich
culture medium. Microb Cell Fact 2014, 13:28.
122. Johansson L, Lidén G: Transcriptome analysis of a shikimic acid
producing strain of Escherichia coli W3110 grown under carbon- and
phosphate-limited conditions. J Biotechnol 2006, 126:528–545.
123. Joyce AR, Reed JL, White A, Edwards R, Osterman A, Baba T, Mori H, Lesely
SA, Palsson BO, Agarwalla S: Experimental and computational assessment
of conditionally essential genes in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2006,
188:8259–8271.
124. Xu Z, Sun X, Yu S: Genome-scale analysis to the impact of gene deletion
on the metabolism of E. coli: constraint-based simulation approach.
BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10(Suppl 1):S62.
125. Rizk ML, Liao JC: Ensemble modeling for aromatic production in
Escherichia coli. PLoS One 2009, 4:e6903.
126. Takors R: Scale-up of microbial processes: Impacts, tools and open
questions. J Biotechnol 2012, 160:3–9.

Page 15 of 15

127. Lara AR, Galindo E, Ramirez OT, Palomares LA: Living with heterogeneities
in bioreactors. Understanding the effects of environmental gradients on
cells. Mol Biotechnol 2006, 34:355–381.
128. Noorman H: An industrial perspective on bioreactor scale-down: What
we can learn from combined large-scale bioprocess and model fluid
studies. Biotechnol J 2011, 6:934–943.
129. Wang J, Huang J, Shi J, Xu Q, Xie X, Chen N: Fermentation characterization
of an L-tryptophan producing Escherichia coli strain with inactivated
phosphotransacetylase. Ann Microbiol 2013, 63:1219–1224.
130. Khamduang M, Packdibamrung K, Chutmanop J, Chisti Y, Srinophakun P:
Production of L-phenylalanine from glycerol by a recombinant
Escherichia coli. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 36:1267–1274.
131. Weiner M, Albermann C, Gottlieb K, Sprenger GA, Weuster-Botz D: Fed-batch
production of L-phenylalanine from glycerol and ammonia with recombinant
Escherichia coli. Biochem Eng J 2014, 83:62–69.
132. Liu SP, Liu RX, Xiao MR, Zhang L, Ding ZY, Gu ZH, Shi GY: A systems level
engineered E. coli capable of efficiently producing L-phenylalanine.
Process Biochem 2014, 49:751–757.
133. Hu Y, Tang T, Yang W, Zhou H: Bioconversion of phenylpyruvic acid to
L-phenylalanine by mixed-gel immobilization of Escherichia coli EP8-10.
Process Biochem 2009, 44:142–145.
doi:10.1186/s12934-014-0126-z
Cite this article as: Rodriguez et al.: Engineering Escherichia coli to
overproduce aromatic amino acids and derived compounds. Microbial
Cell Factories 2014 13:126.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

